Reasoning
Reasoning represents one of the great advances that human beings have made in
their ability to understand and make sense of the world. It has been described as a
'complex weave of abilities that help you get someone else's point, explain a
complicated idea, generate reasons for your viewpoints, evaluate the reasons given
by others, decide what information to accept or reject, see the pros as well as the
cons and so forth'.3
 Yet it is also the case that reasoning does not come naturally but
must be learnt and can be improved.
Let us begin with an easy example. Imagine you hold an apple in one hand and
an orange in the other. Now, at first sight, these two objects appear to be completely
different; each would seem to be understandable only in its own terms—that is, in
a way unique to each apple and each orange. However, we are better able to
understand them and to communicate what we think about them when we start to
make connections. Here are some examples:
• An apple is not an orange.
• An apple and an orange are similar: both are pieces of fruit.
• This apple will be, roughly speaking, the same as all the other apples
I have eaten.
• If I eat this orange and I like the taste, then I can assume that
generally I will like the taste of other oranges.
• You should eat this fruit because you are hungry.
Obviously, this list makes only a few simple connections between the two
particular pieces of fruit that we are considering; it also makes a few connections
between the orange and the apple and other pieces of fruit generally; and the latter
connections relate fruit to people.
If we did not make these connections, then every time we ate an orange, for
example, it would be a new experience. We would not be able to rely on past
experience or on our experiences with other things; nor would we be able to make
any predictions about future experience. Such a world might be interesting (as each
morning you drank your orange juice and had a whole new experience), but it
would also be extremely confusing. Moreover, if you think about a more complex
example (say, deciding to study for a university degree) you can see that, without
the ability to make connections between things, you would not be able to make 
4 SMART THINKING: SKILLS FOR CRITICAL UNDERSTANDING & WRITING
your decision in the way that all of us take for granted (by thinking, for example,
'A university degree will help me get a better job'). When we start to make connections, we are able to know things of which we have no direct experience (and
which may not yet have happened). Of course, since we live in a society in which
reasoning is accepted as the main method of processing information, we already use
reasoning, but we usually do not think about it.
Often, we can feel reasonably certain about our knowledge because it is based
on evidence of things that we do know about. For example:
In the past, when driving down the freeway after work, I have found that
there is usually a traffic jam. Because of the traffic jam, it always takes a
long time to get home. So, today, because I need to get home quickly, I
had better leave work earlier.
The conclusion that 'I had better leave work earlier' follows from the evidence
or reasons given for it. We can say that it is a 'reasonable' conclusion. Using
reasoning requires us to look for and rely on structures of connections between
separate things or events in the world; it also requires us to make an active effort to
create these structures—to make the connections that we cannot easily see.
The two main kinds of relationships that underpin these structures are:
• how things relate to one another, at any given moment (syntagmatic relationships such as 'an orange is a citrus fruit' or 'citrus fruits are edible')
• how things relate to one another, over time (paradigmatic relationships such
as 'eating too many oranges made me feel sick' or 'if I want vitamin C, then I
should eat an orange').
Working out the precise relationship requires attention to a number of
'patterns' that might help us to see how one thing is linked to another. These
patterns can be understood through concepts such as:
• similarity/difference
• commonality/inconsistency
• necessity and sufficiency.
When we make these connections, we are able to function much more
effectively and to make sense of the world around us. In particular, we are more
capable of communicating our ideas and discussing knowledge with other
people.
The things, then, that we do with reasoning, as a form of communication, are:
• arguing ('You should not believe what you see on television because ... ')4
• explaining ('Digital television has been introduced because ... ')
• making decisions CI think we should buy a digital television receiver because
... ')
• predicting the future ('I expect digital television to make pay television better
because ... ')
• exploring issues ('How will digital television link to the Internet?') 
SMART THINKING 5
• finding answers ('Why did the government decide on a higher-quality digital
television standard?')
• justifying actions ('When first introduced, I thought subscribing to pay television was not a good idea because ... ').
So, smart thinking is about reasoning, which is about the use and communication of knowledge. Researching, reading, analysing, testing, checking, planning,
and writing all depend on understanding those interrelationships. Once you
understand that knowledge consists of innumerable interrelations between small
'bits' of information, then you will be able to find, shape, and use knowledge for
yourself.
But reasoning is also about people: the authors and audiences of arguments,
explanations, and so on. And it is in relation to the human, social aspect of
reasoning that we must really be 'smart'. Reasoning is not just formal logic; nor is
it an abstract way of thinking about ideas. It is always a social act. People always use
reasoning for particular purposes (be they economic, political, or whatever). They
all have different perspectives on the issues being debated. Their age, class, race,
gender, and ethnicity all influence the broad structures upon which they rely in
reasoning. If we forget that reasoning has this social aspect, then we will run the
risk of failing to think effectively (this point will be explored in more detail in later
chapters). The connections and relations between ideas, events, proposals, and so
on only become meaningful in the context of how, when, where, and why they are
communicated with others.
How do we study smart thinking?
Thinking about thinking
Reasoning is something we already do: all of us have learnt, in one way or another,
to think and to reason, to make connections and see relationships between various
events and attitudes in our world. So, being a smart thinker is not about becoming
a different sort of person, but about improving skills that you already have. The way
to achieve this goal (and the main emphasis within this book) is to become explicitly aware of the analytical processes involved in reasoning. If you do, then you will
be able to analyse complex issues more deeply, understand and process information
more effectively, and communicate your ideas convincingly.
In succeeding chapters, then, we will learn a way of talking and thinking about
reasoning that allows us to understand and use reasoning better. In particular, we
will learn about the 'analytical structure' of ideas, which is, essentially, the clearest
expression of reasoning. However, we usually encounter such structures 'embedded'
in the words we read and hear, or in so-called 'natural language'. We must learn to
distinguish more effectively between the structures and the natural language
through which it comes to us. We will also encounter the idea of 'analytical
questions', which can guide the way we think about and develop the relationships
that comprise our analytical structures. 
6 SMART THINKING: SKILLS FOR CRITICAL UNDERSTANDING & WRITING
Thinkers with attitude
Remember, smart thinking always has a social dimension: we humans are doing the
reasoning. As a result, one of the key ingredients of successful thinking and analysis,
and of the effective use of reasoning, is our own attitude. For most (if not all) of us,
our knowledge will usually consist of both the basic information or 'facts' we know,
as well as a framework or structure of broader ideas with which we interpret these
facts. Many of us are quite capable of assimilating and 'knowing' the facts, but
smart thinkers constantly assess their structures and frameworks. In the process,
they develop a much deeper and more effective appreciation of situations and
events. Smart thinkers can be confident in their reasoning, precisely because they
do not rely on too many unexamined or unquestioned assumptions.
First of all, we should always be willing to reflect on our own views and
positions—to scrutinise the way we think about the world. We might ask ourselves,
from time to time:
• Are my views consistent with one another?
• What assumptions underpin my views?
• Am I open to new ideas and alternative conclusions?
• Can I look at this issue from another perspective?
We should also be constantly asking ourselves, in relation to the issues that
matter to us:
• Why did this happen?
• What should we do next?
• What does it mean?
As we will see, questioning is the key analytical skill that enables us to develop
complex knowledge about the world in the form of structures of related ideas, so as
to communicate with other people.
It is not the answers to these questions that matter, but the very fact that we ask
them of ourselves, the willingness not to 'take things for granted' or to be satisfied
with the 'obvious answer'. Indeed, a great failure of our society is that, by and large,
we are people who believe that someone has the answer and all we have to do is
develop a clever way of finding that answer. In fact, the key skill that you need, to
be an effective and thoughtful adult who is able to engage with and understand the
world, is not an ability to find the answers: it is the ability to ask the right questions.
If you can ask the right questions, then most of the answers will come very easily.
Moreover, you will also be able to determine why others do not necessarily accept
your answers but have their own views. Questions are fundamental to reasoning.
Exercise 1.2
On a piece of paper, write down a key issue that you are dealing with at the
moment—at work, perhaps an assignment, or something significant to you; don't 
SMART THINKING 7
choose a matter that is personal and emotional since these are often best
analysed in different ways. Then start to ask yourself, in your mind, questions that
will help to analyse that issue. As you go, write them down on the page, review
them, and add more questions. Try to ask questions that are prompted by the first
questions you thought of, questions that 'connect' the dots between the issue and
another question.
Why do we need to 'think smart'?
Basically, unless we are smart thinkers, we cannot understand the world as well as
we should; we cannot solve problems effectively and consistently; we cannot be
successful in the areas of our life that concern information. Knowledge is the 'stuff
of everyday life in the early twenty-first century. We are always being asked to find
it out, develop it, communicate it, and think about it. Smart thinking improves the
ways in which we can work with knowledge and information.
First of all, smart thinking helps you to study. All academic work requires the use
of reasoning. You want to understand the content, to digest information, pick out
the key issues to learn, grasp the underlying concepts, and come to terms with unfamiliar ideas: reasoning is the way to go. Most teachers look for reasoned explanations and arguments when marking assignments. More importantly, by using
smart-thinking skills to understand context—the situations in which we learn and
communicate knowledge—you can understand the system you are in, the expectations and requirements on you as students, and then fulfil those requirements.
Second, smart thinking helps you at work. Work is, by and large, about decision
making. It involves initiating change, coping with new and unfamiliar situations,
finding better ways of doing things, finding out crucial information, understanding
the people and institutions you work with, and solving complex problems. You use
reasoning to accomplish these tasks, and if you have smartened up your thinking,
then you will have more confidence in your abilities and succeed more often. In
particular, the insights gained through smart thinking will assist in promoting more
effective communication. Such communication is essential to successful business
and professional life.
Third, and perhaps most importantly, smart thinking makes you an active
member of communities. We are all members of various local and national groups
and communities. While our membership of these communities gives us certain
rights (for example, the rights of citizenship), it also entails certain responsibilities.
It is our responsibility to understand what is happening in society and to act where
necessary to conserve or change, to get involved, to make things better, and to fight
injustice. We can only pick our way through the complex tangle of opinions, assertions, ideas, and assumptions that make up the dominant social world in which we
live /fwe use the skills of smart thinking. Otherwise we are just going to be swept
along without any control over events, a situation that is unhelpful for us as
individuals but worse for the overall community, to which we owe the responsibilities that come with our rights. 
8 SMART THINKING: SKILLS FOR CRITICAL UNDERSTANDING & WRITING
Moreover, as the neo-punk band Bad Religion sing, there is an inner logic to
the events that surround and involve us and, very often, we are taught to stay far
from it. We often think that the best way to live our lives is to stay out of the way.
As the song 'Inner Logic' continues: 'don't ask questions, don't promote
demonstration/don't look for new consensus/don't stray from constitution'. There
are two equally undesirable extremes in this refusal to think things through. At one
extreme, staying away from the 'logic' means putting too much faith in so-called
'scientific', 'objective' knowledge (which appears as if it can never be questioned).
At the other extreme, we shy away from complexity by putting too much reliance
on individual relativism, in which each person's opinion is thought to be as good as
anyone else's. We should never assume that there can be only one right view; we
should not, in turn, presume that all views are right.
We do need to make the 'effort to reveal' the logic, to 'pierce the complexity',
not only for ourselves but for the common good. Smart thinking is how to do it.
Generally, knowledge is tied up in contexts of power and influence, and is hardly
ever 'objective' or 'neutral'. Smart thinking can help empower us in the face of
knowledge, revealing its political and social purposes, its biases and consequences,
its exclusions and errors